new external-plugins page (not ready to merge for CE 2.3 release) (#2528)
Kong/docs.konghq.com: app/2.3.x/external-plugins.md

---

> title: External plugins support

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: External Plugins Support
```

---

## Introduction

External plugins are those that run on a process separate from Kong itself,
enabling the use of any programming language for which an appropriate

> "plugin server" is available.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
plugin server is available.
```

Each plugin server hosts one or more plugins and communicates with the

> main Kong process via unix sockets.  If so configured, Kong can manage

Reviewer: ```suggestion
main Kong process through Unix sockets.  If so configured, Kong can manage
```

those processes, starting, restarting and stopping as necessary.

> Kong currently maintains a Go language pluginserver,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Kong currently maintains a Go language plugin server,
```

[go-pluginserver] and the corresponding PDK library
package, [go-pdk].

## Kong configuration

The `pluginserver_names` property is a comma-separated list of names, one
for each plugin server process.  These names are used to group each process'
properties and to annotate log entries.

> For each name, three other properties can be defined:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For each name, other properties can be defined:
```

Avoid future maintenance when this could change.

> property | description | default

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Property | Description | Default
```

---------|-------------|--------

> `pluginserver_<NAME>_socket` | unix socket path | `/usr/local/kong/<NAME>.socket`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`pluginserver_<NAME>_socket` | Unix socket path | `/usr/local/kong/<NAME>.socket`
```

> `pluginserver_<NAME>_start_cmd` | command to start the plugin server process | `/usr/local/bin/<NAME>`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`pluginserver_<NAME>_start_cmd` | Command to start the plugin server process | `/usr/local/bin/<NAME>`
```

> `pluginserver_<NAME>_query_cmd` | command to dump available plugins' info | `/usr/local/bin/query_<NAME>`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`pluginserver_<NAME>_query_cmd` | Command to dump available plugins' info | `/usr/local/bin/query_<NAME>`
```

For example, you could set Go and Python plugins like this:

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```bash
```

pluginserver_names = go,python

pluginserver_go_socket = /usr/local/kong/go_pluginserver.socket
pluginserver_go_start_cmd = go-pluginserver -kong-prefix /usr/local/kong/ -plugins-dir /usr/local/kong/go-plugins
pluginserver_go_query_cmd = go-pluginserver -dump-all-plugins -plugins-dir /usr/local/kong/go-plugins

pluginserver_python_socket = /usr/local/kong/pyton_pluginserver.socket
pluginserver_python_start_cmd = pypluginserver.py
pluginserver_python_query_cmd = pypluginserver.py -dump
```

### Legacy configuration

> Kong versions 2.0 to 2.2 supported only Go external plugins and a single

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Kong versions 2.0.x to 2.2.x  supported only Go external plugins and a single
```

> pluginserver using a different configuration style.  Starting with Kong 2.3,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
plugin server using a different configuration style.  Starting with Kong 2.3,
```

the old style is recognized and internally transformed to the new style.

If property `pluginserver_names` isn't defined, the legacy properties
`go_plugins_dir` and `go_pluginserver_exe` are tried:

> property | description | default

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Property | Description | Default
```

---------|-------------|--------

> `go_plugins_dir` | directory with Go plugins | `off`, meaning to disable Go plugins

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`go_plugins_dir` | Directory with Go plugins | `off`, meaning to disable Go plugins
```

> `go_pluginserver_exe` | path to the go-pluginserver executable | `/usr/local/bin/go-pluginserver`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`go_pluginserver_exe` | Path to the go-pluginserver executable | `/usr/local/bin/go-pluginserver`
```

> Notes:

Reviewer: Should this be Limitations?

Author: not sure.  "limitations" sounds like something we couldn't make better, but this is about backwards compatibility.  i thought of adding a fourth bulletpoint like "kong 2.3 supports go-pluginserver v0.5.0 with the old configuration style and either go-pluginserver v0.6.0 or go-pdk embedded server (or both at the same time)"  but i don't know if that helps to clear or to confuse things.

maybe a table?  in the end it's just: "use the latest of everything, and it should work"

Reviewer: Maybe just make the lead-in "Backward compatibility" instead of "Notes:"?

And add your last sentence.

- The old style doesn't allow multiple plugin servers.
- Version 0.5.0 of [go-pluginserver] requires the old style configuration.
- The new style configuration requires v0.6.0 of [go-pluginserver]

## Developing Go plugins

Kong support for the Go language consist of two parts:

- [go-pdk] as a library, provides Go functions to access Kong features of the [PDK][kong-pdk].

> - [go-pluginserver] an executable to dynamically load plugins written in Go.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [go-pluginserver] an executable to dynamically loaded plugins written in Go.
```

Author: this executable loads plugins, and does it dynamically.   the other form leaves the sentence "unverbed" :grin:

Reviewer: Oh  my apologies that suggestion was wrong

Notes:

The Kong version 2.3 allows multiple plugin servers; in particular

> it's now possible to write "single-plugin servers", in effect plugins as

Reviewer: ```suggestion
it's now possible to write single-plugin servers, in effect plugins as
```

> microservices.  To help on this, version v0.6.0 of the [go-pdk] package

Reviewer: ```suggestion
microservices.  To help with this, version v0.6.0 of the [go-pdk] package
```

> includes an optional plugin server, see [Embedded Server](#embedded-server)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
includes an optional plugin server. See [Embedded Server](#embedded-server)
```

> for info on this.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
for more information.
```

> The [go-pluginserver] process is still supported.  Its main advantage is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [go-pluginserver] process is still supported. Its main advantage is
```

> that it is a single process for any numbe of plugins, but the dynamic

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that it's a single process for any number of plugins, but the dynamic
```

> loading of plugins has proven challenging under Go language; unlike

Reviewer: ```suggestion
loading of plugins has proven challenging under the Go language; unlike
```

the microservice architecture, which is well supported by the language
and tools.

### Development

To write a Kong plugin in Go, you need to:

1. Define a structure type to hold configuration.
2. Write a `New()` function to create instances of your structure.
3. Add methods on that structure to handle phases.
   

> if you want a dynamically-loaded plugin to be used with [go-pluginserver]:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want a dynamically-loaded plugin to be used with [go-pluginserver]:
```

Reviewer: You'll probably need to indent to avoid breaking the numbering sequence. @javierguerragiraldez Can you please provide a direct review link to this content so we can check?

Author: the first three steps are the same, but from there it diverges.  the "if" lines should break the flow but keep the numbers.   didn't find a more clear way to put it without drawing a flow diagram

4. Compile your Go plugin with `go build -buildmode plugin`.
5. Put the resulting library (the `.so` file) into the `go_plugins_dir` directory.
   

> if you want a standalone plugin microservice:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want a standalone plugin microservice:
```

> 4. include `go-pdk/server` sub-library.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Include the `go-pdk/server` sub-library.
```

> 5. Add a `main()` function that calls `server.StartServer(New, Version, Priority)`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. Add a `main()` function that calls `server.StartServer(New, Version, Priority)`.
```

> 6. Compile as an executable with `go build`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
6. Compile as an executable with `go build`.
```

> **Note**: check out [this repository](https://github.com/Kong/go-plugins)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Note**: Check out [this repository](https://github.com/Kong/go-plugins)
```

for example Go plugins.

#### 1. Configuration Structure

Plugins written in Lua define a schema to specify how to read and validate
configuration data coming from the datastore or the Admin API.  Since Go is a

> statically type language, all that specification is handled by defining a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
statically-typed language, all that specification is handled by defining a
```

configuration structure:

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```bash
```

global review comment

Author: this is not bash language.  putting this might highlight words like `if`, `true`, `until`, `kill` and more.  better to leave unspecified  (unless there is a ```text flag?)

Reviewer: okay

type MyConfig struct {
    Path   string
    Reopen bool
}
```

Public fields (that is, those starting with a capital letter) will be filled
with configuration data.  If you want them to have a different name in the
datastore, add field tags as defined in the `encoding/json` package:

```
type MyConfig struct {
    Path   string `json:my_file_path`
    Reopen bool   `json:reopen`
}
```

#### 2. New() Constructor

> Your plugin must define a function called New that creates an instance of this type

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Your plugin must define a function called `New` that creates an instance of this type
```

> and returns as an `interface{}`.  In most cases it’s just this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and returns as an `interface{}`.  In most cases, it’s just this:
```

```
func New() interface{} {
    return &MyConfig{}
}
```

You can add more fields to the structure and they’ll be passed around, but

> there’s no guarantees about the lifetime or quantity of configuration

Reviewer: ```suggestion
there are no guarantees about the lifetime or quantity of configuration
```

instances.

#### 3. Phase Handlers

Similarly to Kong Lua plugins, you can implement custom logic to be executed at

> various points of the request processing life-cycle. For example, to execute

Reviewer: ```suggestion
various points of the request processing lifecycle. For example, to execute
```

> custom Go code in the "access" phase, define a function named `Access`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
custom Go code in the access phase, define a function named `Access`:
```

```
func (conf *MyConfig) Access (kong *pdk.PDK) {
  ...
}
```

The phases you can implement custom logic for are, and the expected function
signature is the same for all of them:
- `Certificate`
- `Rewrite`
- `Access`
- `Response`
- `Preread`
- `Log`

> Similar to Lua plugins, the presence of the `Response` handler automatically enables the "buffered proxy" mode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Similar to Lua plugins, the presence of the `Response` handler automatically enables the buffered proxy mode.
```

### Embedded server

Each plugin can be a microservice, compiled as a standalone executable.

> To use the embedded server, include "github.com/Kong/go-pdk/server" in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To use the embedded server, include `github.com/Kong/go-pdk/server` in
```

the imports list, and add a `main()` function:

```go
func main () {
  server.StartServer(New, Version, Priority)
}
```

Note that the `main()` function must have a `package main` line at the
top of the file.

> Then, a standard go build creates an executable. no extra "go-pluginserver",

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then, a standard Go build creates an executable. There  are no extra "go-pluginserver",
```

> no plugin loading, no compiler/library/environment compatibility issues.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
no plugin loading, and no compiler/library/environment compatibility issues.
```

> The resulting executable can be placed somewhere in your path (for example

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The resulting executable can be placed somewhere in your path (for example,
```

> `/usr/local/bin`).  The common `-h` flag shows a "usage" help message:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`/usr/local/bin`). The common `-h` flag shows a usage help message:
```

```
$ my-plugin -h

Usage of my-plugin:
  -dump
        Dump info about plugins
  -help
        Show usage info
  -kong-prefix string
        Kong prefix path (specified by the -p argument commonly used in the kong cli) (default "/usr/local/kong")
```

When run without arguments, it will create a socket file with the
`kong-prefix` and the executable name, appending `.socket`.  For example,

> if the executable is `my-plugin` it would be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
if the executable is `my-plugin`, it would be
```

`/usr/local/kong/my-plugin.socket` by default.

> Example configuration: two standalone plugins, called `my-plugin`

Reviewer: Awkward to have a sentence with two colons. Suggest making a heading at the appropriate level.

```suggestion
## Example configuration

Two standalone plugins, called `my-plugin`
```

Author: done

and `other-one`:

```
pluginserver_names = my-plugin,other-one

pluginserver_my_plugin_socket = /usr/local/kong/my-plugin.socket
pluginserver_my_plugin_start_cmd = /usr/local/bin/my-plugin
pluginserver_my_plugin_query_cmd = /usr/local/bin/my-plugin -dump

> pluginserver_other_one_socket = /usr/local/kong/ohter-one.socket

Reviewer: ```suggestion
pluginserver_other_one_socket = /usr/local/kong/other-one.socket
```

pluginserver_other_one_start_cmd = /usr/local/bin/other-one
pluginserver_other_one_query_cmd = /usr/local/bin/other-one -dump

```

> Note that the "socket" and "start command" settings coincide with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that the socket and start command settings coincide with
```

---

> title: External Plugins Support

Reviewer 2: I believe the "External" nomenclature used here doesn't help understanding what they are. I would suggest calling this "Plugins in other languages". That's what most people care about, and that's what they will Google for when trying to find information about this. The fact that they need to be implemented on an external process is an implementation detail, not the main thing.

Author: agree

---

## Introduction

> External plugins are those that run on a process separate from {{site.base_gateway}} itself,

Reviewer 2: I would begin this by saying "Kong supports Lua plugins natively. Plugins written in other languages need to be served by a separate process, that we call _plugin server_."

Author: done

enabling the use of any programming language for which an appropriate
plugin server is available.

Each plugin server hosts one or more plugins and communicates with the
main {{site.base_gateway}} process through Unix sockets.  If so configured, {{site.base_gateway}} can manage
those processes, starting, restarting and stopping as necessary.

{{site.base_gateway}} currently maintains a Go language plugin server,
[go-pluginserver] and the corresponding PDK library
package, [go-pdk].

## Kong Gateway plugin server configuration

The `pluginserver_names` property is a comma-separated list of names, one
for each plugin server process.  These names are used to group each process'
properties and to annotate log entries.

For each name, other properties can be defined:

Property | Description | Default
---------|-------------|--------
`pluginserver_<NAME>_socket` | Unix socket path | `/usr/local/kong/<NAME>.socket`
`pluginserver_<NAME>_start_cmd` | Command to start the plugin server process | `/usr/local/bin/<NAME>`
`pluginserver_<NAME>_query_cmd` | Command to dump available plugins' info | `/usr/local/bin/query_<NAME>`

> For example, you could set Go and Python plugins like this:

Reviewer 2: Is python supported? If not, we should add a note.

Author: done (with a bit of https://www.smbc-comics.com/comic/language)
